---
key: 4
title: "Encoding and Evolution"
source: "Designing Data-Intensive Applications"
---

## Formats for Encoding Data

Programs interact with data in one of two forms, either using pointers to data
structures (manipulable and provide efficient access) or encoded as a byte
sequence for disk writing or network transportation. We transform data between
these two representations using serialization/deserialization, also referred to
as marshalling/unmarshalling.

Standardized, language-agnostic formats for representing data can be
human-readable, or "textual", as is the case with JSON, XML, and CSV. These have
the advantage of easy interoperability with third-party libraries and consumers.
On the other hand, binary encoding can be more compact and easier to parse.

Protocol Buffers is one such binary encoding library. It requires that users
define a schema for data similar to a struct definition, including a tag (key)
and type for each field. The serialized representation encodes this information
plus the length and value of data to compact the information.

Schema evolution in Protocol Buffers is facilitated by field tags, where new
fields are given a unique tag. Old code uses the encoded data length to skip
over fields that it isn't programmed to handle, ensuring forwards compatibility.
Backwards compatibility also depends on field tags, though new fields must be
optional or have a default value, lest they fail checks.

## Modes of Dataflow

Database writes involve encoding data to the specified format, while reads
involve decoding data. Data can be read or written by one or more processes, 
simultaneously or with years in between. Forwards and backwards compatibility
are clearly important here, but care must also be taken to not lose data in
between encoding and decoding operations.

Services are the processes on either end of a client-server connection where
data is transmitted between them over a network. Seperating business logic into
services allows for easier maintainability and coordination, in theory
increasing development velocity. Web services are those which communicate via
HTTP, with REST being the most common paradigm for designing web services.
Remote procedure call (RPC) frameworks are alternatives to REST that conceal
network calls in code, making them look like any other function call. RPC
frameworks often make use of binary encoding (e.g gRPC uses Protobuf) while REST
most often uses JSON or XML data formats.

Asynchronous message-passing systems can be thought of as a middle ground 
between the service and database paradigms. Like services, these systems rely on
network connections to pass data, however this data isn't directly sent from
service to service, instead it is stored temporarily by a message broker. This
model confers advantages such as buffering messages if the recipient is
unavailable, sending messages to multiple recipients at once, and decoupling
sender from receiver. This last point implies that senders no longer expect to
receive synchronous replies to their messages. We say that senders publish
messages to topics, which then go out to consumers of said topics.
